Let's say you've just joined an organization as a junior data scientist and you're yet to start your first project. One morning the product manager showed up at your desk and says - hey, welcome to the organization; we are excited to have you onboard! Our organization generates a large volume of data every month. I have an employee dataset siting in my computer for sometime, can you see what you can do with it?

So you get the data. Now you are thinking what to do with it? You have several options, with different levels of complexity. 

Describing the data is the most basic thing you could do. You could see if there are problems with the dataset such as missing values, any outliers (as aresult of a mistake in data inputs). You could generate some basic statistics (e.g. mean, mediun, min-max, distribution etc.). You could also visualize variables that are interesting. And so on. It's basically all you have learnt in exploratory data analysis (EDA) in your data science journey.  

At the next level of complexity you are asking a good question of the data. Remember that you are asking a question, not thinking what model to fit; not just yet. If it's an emplyee dataset you could ask: what is the composition of the employees in the organization in terms of gender & race? Or what is the distribution salary and compensation? Are there some odds that you discovered and want to bring to the attention of the management? Most organizations will hprobably ave already known those basic questions but you get the idea how to ask a question.  

The third level of complexity is a difficult one. You may not be able to learn anything new until you studied the data well, understand the business as a whole and have adequate domain knowledge. As you spend more time in the organization and become familiar with it's business practices, along the way you will develop hypotheses. A single dataset that you now have may not answer your question, instead you may need to pull together information from various sources to test your hypotheses.
